Custom Controller for Hollis H-160

This project documents the necessary hardware and software required to 
upgrade the H-160 DPV from the 30V 16Ah NiMH battery to a 43V 20Ah 
LiFePO4 battery. This should provide about double the run time and 
provide a better self-discharge rate.

The H-160 dive propulsion vehicle has a 30V NiMH battery rated for 16Ah 
and provides a burn time of between 1h30m and 45m, typically at 
cruising speed (sidemount, dry suit, 2 speed, 7th pitch) gets at best a 
little over an hour of burn time. The battery pack also loses charge 
quickly and if left on the charger it will still lose charge, the 
Hollis charger doesn't top up after a full charge.

Challenges
----------

The DPV needs to be close to neutrally buoyant and ideally have a 
centre of gravity at the longitudanal centre but laterally towards the 
starboard side to balance some of the motor torque and ease hand 
strain. The H-160 as is, in fresh water, is neutrally buoyant with less 
than 0.8 lbs of lead however has the centre of gravity at the stern, 
and offers little torque compensation.

The new battery needs to be the same weight or lighter than the stock 
battery. If it's heavier then additional buoyancy would be needed to 
compensate. That would require a longer hull (i.e. machining a new one, 
or making an extender) or adding external buoyancy perhaps in the form 
of ABS tubes strapped to the side.

The new battery also needs to physically fit into the hull.

A new controller is needed to step down the voltage from the battery to 
the voltages used by each of the three speeds. The controller also 
enters a "limp mode" when the battery voltage reaches a certain level, 
it protects the battery from damage but also gives the diver some 
thrust to exit the dive.

Each component, the motor, the controller and the battery are sealed so 
that a hull leak will not damage any of the components and leak in the 
shaft seal will only affect the battery. This challenge is not 
addressed in this design.


My Design
---------

The LiFePO4 chemistry was chosen for its high power to weight ratio. 
Pouch cells were the most effective because cylindrical cells have 
heavy sheet metal containers. Also cylinders tend to have voltage 
cut-off circuitry which we don't want. I chose A123 Systems 20Ah cells, 
12 of them in series to obtain a nominal 40V battery. These cells have 
an impressive engineering report where they can take a lot of over 
charge and undercharge without damage.

The battery assembly is a custom 1/4" acetal connector plate with two 
1/4" acetal side plates compressed by gear clamps. Four AL u-channel 
pieces, used as a mount system, are held in grooves cut into the acetal 
and held in place with the same gear clamps. The battery tabs fit 
through slits cut in the connector plate and clamped down with screws 
and plates. The acetal takes a thread tap quite well.

A new circuit board is needed to reduce the voltage for each of the 
three speeds. It's populated with a switching power supply, an arduino 
and several power components which mimics the stock controller.

The stock battery is removed and taken apart. The top plate is kept for 
the new design. The four posts on which the battery sits are also 
removed and replaced with four AL 6016-t6 1/4" rods, the ends tapped 
with 1/4" x 20 TPI. These rods are bolted onto the stock base (the one 
that the stock 4 rods were secured to). 1/2" AL tube was cut and put in 
place to support the battery. the battery is slid over these rods with 
the rods sliding into the u-channel. The stock battery plate is put on 
top and wing nuts used to secure it all.




